[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. [music] I'm Tracy
Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, we
like talking about the old economy on
this podcast, right? I don't even think
when people use that term old economy, I
think it's kind of unfair. I It's funny,
I was literally about to respond and say
that maybe like this whole old economy,
new economy distinction is a little
unfair. The old economy is still still
here. It's not, you know, It's still
with us. It's not generative AI, but
it's arguably maybe it's even more
important. The things that we call the
old economy, you know, you couldn't have
the new economy without without cooling
and heating.
This is exactly what I was going to say
because like the old economy, the actual
business of making things and moving
things, heating and cooling is very much
enmeshed with the new economy, which is
all about generative AI. And in order to
have generative AI, you need data
centers, right? And if there's one thing
we know about data centers, it's that
they consume vast amounts of both
building material and electricity. And
he yeah, heating and cooling. So, yes,
you're absolutely right. We will We will
no longer use the slur old economy. We
will find some other other word. But
yes, we like talking about industries in
which physical things get built and then
sold at a higher profit at a higher
price from which they were built from
and how these how these things actually
work.
Yes, indeed. So, we are going to be
talking about that today. We also like
occasionally talking about deals and
it's not every day that we get to talk
about a deal that has literally just
been announced and is, I think, you
know, one of the biggest deals that
we've actually seen recently. That's
right. It's a deal talk. Let's do it.
Okay. So, we do in fact have the perfect
guest. We're going to be speaking with
Brad Jacobs. He's been on the show
before and he is, of course, the CEO and
founder of QXO, which has just announced
a huge deal to buy a company called
TopBuild in the insulation space.
They're paying 17 billion and at the end
of this acquisition, they expect to be
the second largest publicly traded
building products distributor in North
America. So, truly a melding of mergers
and again, the the old / new economy.
Brad, welcome back to Odd Lots. Thanks
so much for coming on. Oh, my pleasure.
Great to be here.
Congrats on the deal. The first question
I have to ask is, is it even accurate to
call this an acquisition right now
because if you're paying 17 billion for
TopBuild, looking at QXO's market cap,
you guys are at like 17 billion as well.
This looks like a merger. This is so
big, this basically looks like a merger.
Yeah, a merger. I'll go with merger.
Merger's fine. Putting together two
great companies and forming an even
greater one.
You know what's funny? I hadn't heard of
TopBuild up until, you know, this
morning or sorry, yesterday when the
news came out they were going to buy it.
You know what I was just thinking about?
Like America's incredible. Like this
company, so it stock now with the
premium that's baked in today trading at
484.
This was a $43 stock as recently as
2018. America's incredible. Like these
companies that sort of fly under most
people's radars can just do You don't
have to be in the Nvidias of the world
to make a lot of money.
Well, I agree with that. You have to
have a service or a product that there's
demand for. And you've got to give a
great customer experience. And if you
have those two things, you'll make a lot
of money. All right. So, walk us through
the rationale for doing this because
again, like huge deal and it seems to
have caught a few people off guard. They
were expecting you to maybe buy, you
know, some smaller companies, keep the
roll-up strategy going. But again, this
one is very large. Oh, yeah.
So,
the acquisition of Beacon following the
acquisition of Kodiak, which is followed
now by the acquisition of TopBuild,
takes us from 11 months ago where we had
no building products revenue, let alone
EBITDA, to the second largest publicly
traded building products distributor in
North America with more than 18 billion
dollars in combined company revenue and
more than 2 billion dollars of combined
adjusted EBITDA. It's a big deal. It's a
big deal in the industry. It's a
big deal in the market as a whole. It's
very creative to our earnings, meaning
meaningfully creative to our earnings.
And when you look at the multiples,
that's reasonable multiples. We're
paying 14.9 times
2025 EBITDA pre-synergies and about 11.8
times EBITDA post-synergies. And And
there's tons of synergies we can get.
We're targeting 300 million dollars or
so of synergies over the next 5 years.
Just to zoom out for a little bit,
regular listeners, of course, know who
Brad is. We've had him on the show
several times. But just in case you
don't, he is a serial entrepreneur. If
there's ever a company and their ticker
has XO in the handle, it almost
certainly was founded by Brad.
Um
>> One exception. Which one? ExxonMobil.
Oh.
>> [laughter]
>> That one.
You didn't found that one. You didn't
found Exxon.
>> I wish I had, but no, got away
[laughter] from me. But it's always
these Again,
I hate words like real economy and old
economy, but we could say physical
economy. And it's like warehouses,
trucking and freight brokerage and
construction equipment rental and
garbage stuff. Like anything real and
physical, that's what Brad's into. He's
founded numerous companies. He also
wrote a book. Came out in 2024, How to
Make a Few Billion Dollars. And the
reason I still have this job today is
because I haven't gotten around to
reading the book yet. Had I gotten
[laughter] around to reading the book
yet, I'd probably be a billionaire by
now and I would be doing something
different. But I'll get around to doing
that eventually. One thing that's
interesting though to me just learning
about TopBuild today in addition to
seeing their stock, they had also been a
serial acquirer. And in fact, it said
like in one of their recent
presentations, this has been one of
their main strategies. So, why don't you
like talk about like who is this company
TopBuild? What do they do? Tell us a
little bit about this the history and
the footprint of this company that
you're buying. TopBuild is the largest
installer and distributor of insulation.
Yeah. And as you were just saying, that
everybody needs insulation. Every every
every house needs insulation in the
walls. Every office building needs
insulation. Everywhere it's It's a
needed product and it's it's not going
anywhere. It's not going to be disrupted
by
AI or LLMs. It's just not going to go
away. Yeah. So, when we complete the
merger, we'll be number one in
insulation.
We'll be
the second biggest in roofing.
We'll be number one in waterproofing.
And we'll hold number one or number two
positions in certain geographies within
lumber and building materials. So, we'll
have a huge addressable market, several
hundred million dollars.
So, I take the point that everyone needs
insulation. This is definitely true. But
we alluded to this in the intro, data
centers in particular need insulation.
How much of this deal is the expectation
that you're going to be getting a lot of
business from the data center build-out
as well? Oh, we will get a lot of
business from data centers, but not just
on the insulation. Data centers need
roofs, too.
Data Data centers need waterproofing.
Very much so.
Data centers often need lumber-related
products. So, so data centers are big
consumers of building products. Now,
TopBuild itself has single-digit
percentage exposure to data centers, but
it's very fast growing.
Wait, sorry. Say that How much exposure
So,
>> Single-digit percentage of the revenue.
Got it. Got it.
>> But but it when it comes to growth, it's
growing very very fast. Okay. So, when
we think about the insulation market in
general, how much is it residential, how
much is it commercial? And is there a
lot of overlap or do companies tend to
specialize in one or the other?
It's fairly evenly split. They have a
little more residential than commercial,
but they have both. Okay.
>> both. And we have that as well, by the
way, in our the company the two
companies we bought before this, Beacon
and Kodiak. We have residential
customers. We have commercial customers.
We have industrial customers. We have
municipal customers.
Everybody needs building products. If
there's a building, it's made of
building products. And just to be clear
on the nature of the business, they do
installation. Like within the the
insulation supply chain, where do they
sit exactly? Is it Do they manufacture
it or is it just distribution and
installation? Like what do they do? They
don't manufacture.
>> Okay. It it they buy it.
And then they either resell it Okay. at
a higher price to to a contractor or
they actually install it. They sell it
and install it and to various customers.
Okay. Well, now I have a dumb question,
but is there a quality differential when
it comes to insulation? Like is there a
particular type of insulation that a
data center would need versus your
run-of-the-mill house?
There's not too many different types of
insulation, but there are different
types. And the big manufacturers are
ones like Owens Corning or Johns
Manville or
uh Knauf is another big one. So, you
know, big companies and very
high-quality stuff. So, insulation has
been around for a long time, but
technology makes it better and better
every decade. Where's it made,
insulation? It's mostly made in the
United States. Is it?
>> Yeah. This seems to be I was surprised.
I remember the last time we talked to
you about like roofing and you mentioned
how much shingles still made in the US.
Talk to us about like why is that? Why
is this a a particular type of good that
is still largely What are the economics
of it such that it still makes sense to
manufacture it in the United States.
>> It's more about regulations. Okay.
>> So, the types of building products, the
regulations, the codes
are different country to country. So,
insulation in Europe is not quite the
same as insulation here. Roofing
products in Europe not quite the same as
it is over here. So, waterproofing, same
thing. So, slightly different regs, and
that makes it better to manufacture
closer to where it's being used.
Hm.
So, how did TopBuild actually get on
your radar? Did you initially approach
them? Did they approach you?
>> them. Absolutely, we approached them
first, yeah.
Okay, so
now I'm very curious cuz I know you have
a lot of experience in M&A, and you
know, a lot of people would describe
your business as basically a roll-up for
building materials, but I also know from
reading your book and by the way, Joe,
I'm not yet a billionaire, but I did
read the book.
>> [laughter]
>> You have a very a very specialized
process uh when you target a company to
acquire them, including having a former
CIA intelligence officer, one of the
guys who I think like worked with lie
detect and all that.
>> uh he was on your podcast.
>> Yeah, yeah. Yes, yes. So, did he uh did
he interview all the CEOs and they all
went through background checks and that
sort of thing? So, so we do background
checks, but we spent 2 days in our
lawyers' offices here in New York and
about 15 members of the senior
management team of TopBuild came up,
including the CEO and CFO. And yeah, we
interviewed each one for like an hour
and a half and got to know them and
checked out. Everything they said was
true. I love that. Interview two guys
for an hour and a half and say, "Here's
$17 billion." Sounds good. No, there's a
I'm sure it's a little more complicated
than that. What else goes in in the due
diligence process? Do you go around and
talk to customers? Oh, yeah. So, talk to
us about that. Well, we have a lot of
the same customers. We have a lot of
same vendors. Big big overlap. So,
TopBuild is very well-known company.
It's the number one company in its
field, so it's pretty easy to check them
out. So, we we knew what we were getting
before we did those interviews over 2
days, but still you want to talk to the
people. You want to find out where are
the skeletons and what are the risks and
what what are the good things and
where's the opportunities and where's
the upside and what are some things you
can bring to the table, particularly in
terms of technology that could
turbocharge the growth of the company.
So, those in-person meetings are very
important. It's not the only part of due
diligence. Sure. You do a lot of stuff
online. You do a lot of stuff with
third-party channel checks, but those
in-person meetings with the management
team are absolutely crucial. I would
never buy a company, any company,
without doing management interviews.
It's the most important part of due
diligence.
It's funny. I was um hanging out with
some people over the weekend, and I was
hearing about some deals that they were
doing in the AI space, including a
pretty large deal that apparently they
completed in an afternoon. And you can
imagine what the due diligence process
is on a deal that's completed in a
single afternoon.
>> I don't know how to do that yet. That
that that that's a over my capabilities,
but it doesn't it doesn't take a long
time. We're surgical and
not overly intrusive in the due
diligence, [music] but afternoon is a
little tight.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So, what made you comfortable with the
premium? Cuz again, 23% on the existing
share price of TopBuild, that's a pretty
you know, that's a pretty nice amount of
money.
It's a fair price. It's not a terribly
high price. It's not terribly low price.
When you look at at multiples of EBITDA
it's 14.9 times 2025
EBITDA pre-synergies and about 11.8
times EBITDA post-synergies, the
expected synergies. So,
you know, it's it's reasonably priced.
It's a lower multiple than we trade at,
which is very important because that's
where you get the accretion. The
accretion to earnings per share. This is
going to be a massively accretive
transaction for us.
Talk to us about setting aside like
setting aside this acquisition, which
we'll come back to. How does business
feel over the last year? You know, just
generally economic conditions in the
building materials uh distribution
world? What's been the last year like?
Super soft. Super super soft. Now, super
soft because demand in general in
building and construction is is soft, is
weak, and we're not immune to that. But
we've mostly been in roofing up until
recently.
>> Yeah, right.
>> Now, roofing is a special animal because
it's extremely affected by
weather. Meaning bad weather. You want
to have bad weather is good weather for
roofing. So, you want to have
>> Yeah. You want to have sleet and a lot
of hailstorms and hurricanes and
tornadoes. And I got to tell you,
there's a lot of cognitive dissonance
about that cuz for all my life I've
watched television, you see a hurricane
like normal people, unless you're a
sociopath you feel bad. You feel oh wow,
it's too bad that these people are
getting their Wait, have you become a
sociopath? No, no, no, no. Definitely
not becoming a sociopath.
>> What? No hail? No. WHEN'S [laughter] THE
NEXT NO HAIL? NO, BUT MY POINT IS THIS.
If a normal person watches television
and sees a people's houses getting the
roofs being blown off usually you feel
bad about that. You feel compassionate.
You feel oh wow, it's too bad for them.
Yeah. So, there's a distance here
because that's really good for the
roofing business. So, so one half of
your brain is still a human and have
compassion and feeling bad for this, and
the other SIDE YOU'RE YEAH, GREAT. I GOT
A STORM. [laughter]
GOT TO HAVE HAILSTORM. ISN'T THAT
FANTASTIC? These people's roofs are
going to go flying off. We're going to
get more business. So, the the good or
bad news, depending on your perspective,
is
in 2025 there really weren't any big
storms. There weren't any named storms,
big hurricanes, tornadoes. Right. So,
that was bad. And compounding on that,
in the first quarter here you had the
bad kind of bad weather, which is snow
and other bad weather that just slowed
everything down, just stopped business
but didn't create any demand for for
roofs.
>> damage. Exactly. So, so external
conditions haven't been great. Now, that
said, I don't care cuz I'm not building
a business for 1 year or 2 years or 3
years. Like I did in my previous
companies, I'm building
a strong, durable, iconic company that's
going to be around for decades. And
that's what I think we're always
thinking about long-term. We're thinking
5, 10 years. We're not thinking about a
quarter or the year. If we have a choice
on a decision for capital allocation or
M&A or investments
we barely think about what how's it
going to affect this quarter, this year.
It's really how's it going to affect the
long-term.
Were you impacted by the tariffs at all?
Did that complicate the existing
business? Not too much because in
roofing
which is what we've been up until Kodiak
and now TopBuild
almost all of it is is manufactured in
the United States, sold in the United
States, or manufactured in Canada or
sold in Canada. And we really don't have
business overseas. So, the tariffs
didn't really affect us. Now, it might
have affected demand destruction
overall. It might have affected how much
construction was happening, but directly
we were not clobbered by the tariffs.
The weath- the weather clobbered us a
lot more than the than the tariffs. What
is the main commodity input for an
insulation?
Oh, it's chemical. It's it's chemically
created and and it's refined in a
manufacturer with a lot of people
looking like chemists. So, like is it
petrochemical? Like if like oil prices
were to surge, would that be a sort of
like margin crimping factor for
insulation prices?
>> Well,
I think we're better off with oil prices
lower
>> Yeah. for demand, not so much for the
cost of the goods, but lower oil prices
there's more confidence and more demand.
But the real factor for building
products is mortgage rates. So, mortgage
rates when they were 7 and 1/2% was was
really bad.
>> Yeah. Cuz people had 3% mortgages or 3
and 1/4% mortgages, and people just have
a problem
paying off a 3% mortgage and taking out
a 7% mortgage. They're now down a bit, 6
and 1/2%
but they got to come down more. So, when
when the Iran war finally ends, and
it'll end someday and interest rates
come down, which they will under this
administration, I'm yeah, it's pretty
good odds that mortgage rates will come
down and business will start booming.
Yeah, this is what I wanted to ask,
which is I guess financing availability
at the moment cuz clearly we are in the
midst of this Iran situation, and we
have seen some very volatile markets out
there. We've seen traders start to
ratchet down, I guess their expectations
for rate cut later this year. What's
financing been like for you at QXO? We
have no problem getting access to
capital. That that's not been an issue
for us. We've raised, since I started
the company almost a couple years ago
we've raised something like $15 billion
and and fairly easily. On this
transaction here, in addition to that
we know it's $17 billion. Now, part of
that
about roughly about
55% of it is going to be in the form of
stock but the other is cash. And raising
we got debt commitments from Morgan
Stanley and from Wells Fargo and from
Barclays and pulled that all together in
about a week.
Hm.
Is synergies, when you talk about the
future cost savings, is that a euphemism
for layoffs? No, just the opposite.
>> Okay. It's it's to grow the business.
It's to it's figure out ways that you
can cross-sell customers.
A contractor who is selling roofing is
is buying roofing and putting that into
their construction
pretty good chance they're going to want
insulation
and what they're building, too. So, when
we also sell windows and doors, for
example, and all of our customers have
some issue some exposure to windows and
doors and we'll be number one in
insulation, number two in roofing,
number one in waterproofing, and number
one or number two in the key geography
served within lumber building materials.
There's a lot of cross-selling between
insulation, roofing, waterproofing, and
lumber. Wait, say more about that
because, you know, we hear from
executives all the time when they talk
about synergies in kind of general
terms, but what exactly is, I guess, the
low-hanging fruit in this particular
deal? Like, what is it that you're able
to do
from day one versus what you're able to
do in like a year or two?
Well, the first thing that we do when we
go in to buy a company, whether it's Top
Build or anybody else, is we meet with
as many people as we can,
and we we ask them to just step back,
get out of their normal comfort zone,
and think about what would be the
perfect circumstances and tools and
techniques and repositioning of the
company to grow even faster. Where's
their Where are their pain points? Where
are things that are holding them back?
And we collaboratively put together a
business plan. Now,
I already know, like with every other
acquisition we've done ever, technology
is going to be the first thing.
Technology today slows people down in
the market. They've got to get the
latest technology, the greatest
warehouse management systems, which
we'll bring to the table, the greatest
TMS transportation management systems,
the greatest ERP, the which is
also using a an CRM that's AI-generated
to empower the salesforce to get
productivity up. Technology is is the
number one enabler of synergies. But
there's going to be so many synergies
here. The cross-selling is a big one.
There are some cost savings. When you're
a bigger player, we're going to be the
second biggest publicly traded building
products distributor, we will get,
because we deserve, a better price from
the manufacturers. I mean, bigger
customers get bigger discounts, bigger
rebates than the smaller customers. So,
a building products distributor, like
any distributor, makes money by buying
products as cheap as possible,
and then selling them at a reasonable
price that's a markup from what you're
buying. These are the two main things.
You're buying and you're selling. Now,
in the meanwhile, under that, you have
to manage your costs. Make sure your
costs are are efficient and lean and not
wasteful and not inefficient. We can do
that, too. But that's not really where
you make the money. You don't make the
money on slashing costs. That's what
private equity guys do. That's not what
I do. What I do is I invest in the
business, I invest in the people, I
invest in their learning and
development, I invest in their training,
I invest in their careers. We tie the
compensation to results. We figure out
what are the right KPIs, the key
performance indicators. What are the
right metrics that are that mark success
in this business? And then we tie the
compensation to that. And let people,
out of self-interest,
do great for the company and create
organic revenue growth on the top side
and then margin expansion on the bottom
side.
I love a business that's just buying
something and finding an opportunity,
you know, buying something, assembling
it, making it to nice, and then selling
it for more. It's old-fashioned. It's
honest. I respect it a lot. I'm glad
that you mentioned the alphabet soup of
different types of enterprise software
that a business has. One of the biggest
themes, as you know, in the market this
year, really maybe over the last 6
months, but definitely in the last year,
is this idea that the relationship
between businesses and their software
vendors is going to change, and the
reason for this is AI. And maybe, you
know, maybe some businesses that didn't
have that expertise in-house, like,
maybe we'll build this solution on our
own rather than hire, etc. Sitting at
said this deal right now, has your in
the last year has your relationship with
software vendors, does it feel like the
leverage is changing thanks to AI, where
is maybe you at the negotiating table
when you're re-upping negotiation for
seats, etc., where you have a little bit
more you can cancel deals or get better
pricing? Talk to us about what's going
on.
>> Not really. I mean, a lot a lot of our
technology is homegrown. We have a lot
of people we've hired from Microsoft and
from other other big
>> not like
building your own like payroll software,
right? Well, we we still we still
outsource That's what I'm saying. Like,
there's like there's a lot of anxiety in
the market that all these legacy
companies that do something simple like
payroll, oh, look at it. You've seen
their share prices. I don't need to show
them to you. Well, long term, Joe,
that's true. Long term, that's true.
Okay. But long term, that's true for
pretty much every job and every every
industry and every company is AI and and
robotics and automation
>> Yeah. is going to disrupt quite a number
of jobs. But having said that, the
productivity of the economy is going to
be so much greater that we can afford to
have more free time and still enjoy nice
lifestyle. So, I'm not worried about
that.
No, not worried, but I do have an oppor-
What I'm saying is like, are you
exploit- Like, do you have any
opportunities to like are you a
beneficiary of these tools?
Change like talk about Yeah. Absolutely.
So, so
I've been a CEO since 1979. It's the
only job I've the only job I've ever
had. I've never been more productive, by
a long shot, than I am right now. Reason
being,
we have AI taking notes of all the
important meetings around the company.
Okay. So, at the end of the day, I can
get a dozen readouts of AI-generated
summaries of everything that's going on
in the company. Stuff that in the old
days, before you had the the AI
note-taking, either it wouldn't reach to
me or it would reach it wouldn't reach
me or it would take, you know, two or
three months before it got to me. So, so
as a CEO now, you know what's going on
in the company all over the company
right away in real time. And when you
have longer meetings, you can the AI
will do sentiment analysis, the AI will
look at trends. We can do customer
surveys, employee surveys using AI that
so powerful now. I mean, you can get
real good analysis from it. And it's
it's hugely powerful. So, you can see
where this is going. AI is going to make
corporate America far more efficient
than it is right now. Everything that's
measurable will be measured, analyzed,
and then
suggesting how to improve it in real
time. It's very exciting time to be
alive and be in the corporate world.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Just going back to the QXO business. So,
I know I keep saying this is a very big
deal, and it is, and it immediately
vaults you to, as we said, the second
largest publicly traded building
products distributor in North America.
As you get bigger and as you make more
of these acqui- acquisitions, you know,
fair fairly quickly, you've done like
three or four now in a little over a
year, I think, or maybe a little less
than a year. Do you worry about
antitrust at all?
Well, we're not at a point where our
market share is so huge that it would
have any effect on raising prices to the
customer. So, no, I don't worry about
that right now.
All right. So, on that note, what is the
universe of potential targets look like
to you right now, and should we expect
that your next deal is going to be quite
as large?
Well, we have a big pipeline, and we're
always talking to many many acquisitions
at the same time. A big mistake a lot of
rollups do, or even corporate acquirers,
is they kind of dabble in M&A. They
don't have like a scientific, organized
process. So, they work on one deal, they
fall in love with the deal, and they
overpay. It's like the biggest crime the
biggest mistake you can make as an
acquirer is to overpay. People say, "Oh,
well,
don't worry about it. You'll forget
about the purchase price the next day."
Well, your balance sheet never ever
forgets the purchase price. That's money
that you've wired out of your account.
It's someone else's account. It's not
coming back. So,
you got to watch the purchase price
quite closely.
What's your advice? You know, like, one
of the things that I'm aware of
over the last 10, 15 years is the rise
of like, I think they're called like
search funds or something. You get like
some guys like an MBA, maybe at Wharton.
They don't know what they want to do.
They raise some money for their friends,
and they're like, "Oh, we're going to
like go buy this local like pool supply
company or whatever, HVAC company, and
we're going to like six sigma it up, and
then we're going to make some money,
etc." I think you're probably a god to
these people cuz you have the art of
buying companies down as practice. Where
do you see them go wrong typically? What
would be your advice to these types who
think, "You know what? I'm going to buy
an old-fashioned business and make it
run great." What do you Where do you see
people go wrong in this? Most of them go
wrong. Most of them go wrong because
they're really not operators. They're
really just promoters. They're financial
guys, and that's fine, but they don't
integrate and optimize the businesses.
Now, they can still make money on the
spread. In other words, you see some of
these smaller rollups, they buy a bunch
of companies that whether veterinarians
or car washes or whatever, and they buy
them at single-digit multiples, and then
suddenly they're 100 or 200 million
dollars of EBITDA, and they say, "Wow,
I'm a big company. I should get a
double-digit multiple." And oftentimes
that works. That's not how we make
money. We make money on, yes, buying
companies at a lower multiple than we
raised capital at, but then integrating
them, optimizing them, improving them,
making yourself more valuable to the
customer, making yourself a real
exciting place to work for the
employees, making a real good long-term
business plan that creates value for
everyone in the ecosystem. That's not
what these smaller rollups do. These
smaller rollups are really simply
playing the arbitrage between what they
buy on small companies and then
aggregating them to get a higher
multiple. You know, I asked you if the
synergies were a euphemism for layoffs,
and you quickly shot that down. You
know, one of the things that Warren
Buffett said from time to time is like,
people who like family-owned businesses,
some of these smaller businesses, they
like selling to Warren Buffett. They
felt like, "Okay, this company that I've
worked with and built for a long time,
it's going to be in good hands." Maybe
they'll give Warren Buffett a slightly
better price than the other guy who came
knocking. Do you feel like from your
perspective it's important that the
would-be seller they like you, that they
feel that this thing that they worked to
build is going to be in good hands, and
is that part of your long-term strategy?
Yeah, I do.
I do. When when you're selling a company
it's kind of emotional thing.
I mean,
you're not going to sell a company for
like 20% less just because just because
you like the guy, but you don't
necessarily go with the highest bidder
every time. Now, it depends who you are.
If you're a private equity owned, yeah,
you probably will go with the highest
bidder cuz you're going away and you
really don't care. If you're a privately
owned company by a family, you care very
much about who you sell the company to
because it's your legacy, then maybe
there's relatives, there's local
communities. It's a big deal. They want
to make sure that you're going to be
good steward for something they've built
up over 10, 20, sometimes 30 years. So,
yeah, it does make a big difference.
Well, yeah, I'm going to put you on the
spot now, but when you were negotiating
on the Top Build deal, what was like the
biggest sticking point that you had to
haggle out? What was the biggest point
of contention?
Well, it's always price
cuz the buyer wants the lowest possible
price and the seller wants the highest
possible price, but we found a
compromise. We found something in the
middle that was fair both for them and
for us. That was really the main
sticking point. The other stuff we saw
eye to eye. They're very similar
cultures in a lot of different ways.
They're good operators, we're good
operators. They've done a lot of M&A,
they've done a few dozen deals that
built up the company. We're big in M&A,
you know, as you know, I've done but my
teams and I have done over 500
acquisitions, so there's a lot of stuff
in common that we had a lot of mutual
affinity and respect over.
By the way, I know this is no longer
your thing anymore, but I'm just looking
at some of the other companies in the
the XPO family.
XPO, that stock is on an absolute tear
and I've been seeing like trucking is
like kind of back. Like trucking is hot
these days. Can you talk a little bit
about what's going on in freight? And
obviously, even though it's your main
focus these days, I'm sure your business
touches freight every single day. Why is
freight so hot again?
Well, freight isn't so hot across the
board. Some companies are still, you
know, not not doing so well on that.
Now, XPO under Mario, under Mario
Harik's leadership, is doing fantastic.
I attribute that mainly to Mario and the
team. The execution of the business
plan's been fantastic. Just laser-like
surgical getting the damages down,
getting the on-time up, improving the
customer experience. It's just an
amazing job at it. It's just executed
very very very well on that and and
that's why the stock has performed so
well. But it's Management matters in any
company, in any industry, management
matters a lot. You can have a strong
management team who understands how you
make money, has the nose for money, has
the analytical capabilities of knowing
what's important and what's not
important, treats their employees right,
treats their customers right, treats
their vendors right, and they'll make a
lot of money. And you'll have the same
exact business across the street with
not so sharp management,
they don't treat their customers right,
they don't treat their employees right,
they don't treat their vendors right,
and boom, this company doesn't do so
well. So, management matters, matters a
real lot.
But again, I know you're not, you know,
on a day-to-day basis with XPO now, but
do you get the sense that the trucking
cycle has turned? That there's a
meaningful
>> at an all-time high, too. Yeah, a
meaningful uptick in in freight. There
are several important gurus, analysts in
the industry experts in trucking who
have called the turn in the last couple
months. We'll see, you know, a couple
months doesn't make a trend yet, but at
the time it has looks like it's
inflected. Looks like there's more goods
moving, there's more freight moving,
industrial America's starting to get a
little bit better. There's more pallets
on the road. It looks like trucking's
gotten better, but it's early days
still.
I just have one last question. I guess
it's basically about the business
environment. It's So, obviously interest
rates are going to be a huge factor out
of your control, though, etc. So, what
can you do about it? Weather out of your
control. Oil price is going to be a
factor, energy price is going to be a
factor in any sort of real goods space.
Another thing that's out of your
control.
But like, here's the weird thing and I
think a lot of people have like This is
the hard thing that a lot of people have
a hard time reconciling, which is that
like
the last couple of years, maybe the last
several years, last couple years they
felt
pretty chaotic. There's obvious There's
a war going on right now. We had this
huge trade shock last year, etc. Some of
the tariffs got watered down a little
bit, but there was still a high level of
uncertainty.
And, you know, we know consumer
sentiment's pretty negative, etc. And
even business sentiment when I read the
regional surveys, not that great. And
yet, by and large, corporate America
seems to be doing well and making a ton
of money, and you wouldn't necessarily
know, especially if you look at the
stock market,
that there is all this this uncertainty
going on. Do you feel a relationship
between like the chaos that you read
about in the news and the choices that
businesses make on a day-to-day to
either invest or not? Of course. So So,
all the things you mentioned, energy
prices, interest rates, etc., that
affects business. So, in terms of
capital allocation, that really matters.
Now, you can always make money if you
got a smart management team in every
part of the cycle, the top, the bottom,
the middle. There's always a play.
There's always way to make money. Now,
it's different in different parts of the
cycle. When things are depressed,
you can buy back your stock, you can do
M&A. When multiples are really high, you
can make a dividend and
use stock for stock deals with
companies. So, I mean, there's different
plays at different parts of the cycle,
but
people have the nose for money will be
able to figure out how to make a buck in
any part of the cycle.
I got to read your book.
>> [laughter]
>> All right. Brad, we're going to leave it
there, but thank you so much for coming
back on Odd Lots to explain the latest
deal. Really appreciate it. Oh, wait, I
should ask before we let you go. Any
hints on the next target? You have
roofing, you have water waterproofing,
you have insulation. What's next? Tracy,
we don't look at just one thing at a
time. That's what we That's our MO in
terms of M&A is look at cast a wide net,
talk to lots of different acquisition
candidates at the same time, move them
all forward ahead like a funnel,
and see who gets to the finish line.
That way you're you're relaxed about it.
You don't have a gun to your head about
a specific deal. So, it's not like I'm
being coy and not telling you the next
deal. I don't know. We're looking at
lots of different things. We'll see when
and which company the stars line up for.
All right. Well, I can tell you in the
Northeast a lot of people are looking at
wood burners at the moment cuz the cost
of heating oil has gone up quite a bit.
So, maybe that maybe there's something
there. There you go. I'm saying this out
of my own self-interest. Okay. Brad
Jacobs, thank you so much for coming
back on Odd Lots. My pleasure. Well,
bye.
>> [music]
>> Joe, did I tell you last year a big XPO
truck got stuck in our driveway?
You should have asked Brad about that.
Well, he's not like at the company
anymore.
>> It's not his responsibility, too.
>> I did think it was pretty funny. I I
resisted the urge to call him and send a
photo of this giant truck like stuck in
the mud, but I felt bad for the driver.
>> Does your place in Connecticut need
insulation?
Yes, it does, actually. So, I'm a
potential customer and I'll be watching
what happens with pricing after all
these synergies very closely. Yes. But
always interesting having Brad on. And I
do think he approaches He seems to
approach M&A a little bit differently to
a lot of other people.
Well, it's interesting to think about
like
I One thing I really have come to
appreciate talking with him is the
degree to which like
he said he's done over 500 deals. So,
it's like, what is he What are you
really good at at your company? For him,
the thing that he really is into his
deal is buying other companies, right?
Like you get the impression that there
are like companies where it's like,
okay, the main thing that we do is we
sell roofing materials and from time to
time we might make an acquisition. But
it's also pretty clear that from his
perspective like the acquisition process
is part of the sort of the core
competency of any business that he
actually runs, which I find to be pretty
interesting.
Yeah, absolutely. And the other thing
that that was interesting about that
conversation is that AI build out and
the idea that like, okay, at the moment
data centers might be, I think he said,
single percentage of Top Build's
business, but growing very quickly, and
so you could see the potential there.
And also like the idea We just talked
about it a little bit, but I've never
been a CEO of a really big company,
but I've managed at times smaller teams
within a company, and like one of the
trickiest things is like having like
true visibility into the operation, you
know, etc. And I know you know, and so
like thinking about like AI is like,
okay, the CEO can see everything to some
extent, summarized, structured in some
way in a at a level that was pretty
that's different. It'd be interesting to
talk more with someone just about how
being a CEO, having line of sight into
your own business, is changing in the
world of like AI note-taking and stuff
like that.
>> Yeah, no, totally. I mean, it sounds
like it's changing pretty fast per what
Brad was saying. Okay, well, shall we
leave it there? Let's leave it there.
This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe
Weisenthal. You can follow me at The
Stalwart. Follow our producers Carmen
Rodriguez at Carmen Arman-Dash at Dash
Bot, Kilburgs at Kilburgs, and Kevin
Lozano at Kevin Lloyd Lozano. And for
more Odd Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odd
lots for the daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
[music] it when we talk about the
old/new economy, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, [music] you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
ad-free. All you need to do is find the
Bloomberg channel on Apple Podcasts
[music] and follow the instructions
there. Thanks for listening.
>> [music]
[music]